# Semantic Structures

## Summary

This folder contains work in progress on the Theory of Semantic Structures.

The purpose of the Theory of Semantic Structures is to provide a model which can be used for simulating human thought inferences and decision making processes. The semantic structures can be viewed as thought-like entities used in modeling the interactions and inferences of which are subject to study in this theory. A realistic model of the semantic structures interactions and creation of new structures will be used to study the evolution of the semantic structures in appropriately designed and tuned simulation environment.

Semantic structures are abstract entitities which can be represented by directed graphs adorned with additional properties residing in appropriately defined metric space. Each node of the semantic directed graph represents a semantic particle which is represented by its position in semantic space. The metric of the semantic space is semantic distance. The closeness of semantic entities maps to the semantic closeness of thoughts which they model.

Additional properties with which each semantic particle is adorned is the semantic mass and semantic energy of the particle. Definition of semantic mass based on information content of a semantic particle is formulated. Each semantic particle is attracted or repelled by other semantic particles. Laws of attraction are postulated and a set of equations based on conservation of certain semantic quantities are derived which govern the formation and relative motion of structures in Semantic Space which govern the movement of structures in semantic space. The equations of evolution of the semantic structures represent a process which depends on the initial conditions in more complex way than the evolution of Markov processes with hidden states. Important property of the semantic equations of evolution is the reversibility of the evolution of the system state i.e. we can find the state of the system at a moment `t_{j-1}` given the state of the system at moment `t_j`.

Rules of reinforcement are postulated which strengthen the connections between closely related concepts and structures.  Special attention is paid to the concept of semantic inference and its implementation via the notion of semantic template structures.

Reinforcement Learning in the semantic simulation environment is implemented via the mediation of  the semantic energy field which permeates semantic space. The trajectory of the semantic particles in an ensemble will depend on the current semantic energy of the ensemble and the semantic signatures of the particles in the ensemble. While each particle in an ensemble moves through semantic space toward the true semantic in-situ position of the ensemble an additional semantic energy is acquired by the particle in the process. The final position at true semantic position of the ensemble will depend on the semantic signatures, the masses, and the energies of its constituents.  As each ensemble moves through specific location in Semantic Space it leaves a mark on the energy field in that location. In other words, the energy field is altered (appropriately small delta by magnitude) in each location on the trajectory of the ensemble towards its true semantic in-situ position. The way the energy field is altered by the passing ensemble is subtle and signature dependent. If another ensemble of particles approaches the same location it will be more likely to pass through that location if it has relevant combined (ensemble) semantic signature and it will be less likely to pass through that location if it has adverse ensemble semantic signature.  That is, the energy alteration in specific region of semantic space would be conducive for an ensemble with relevant semantic signature and would be repelling an ensemble with adverse semantic signature. 

Additionally the duration for which those alterations (or disturbances) of the semantic energy field last depends on how much the semantic structure which caused them has been used in inferences. 

Thus the described alterations of the energy field in semantic space introduce a feedback mechanism to tune the trajectories of ensembles which will be entering the system in the future based on the current state of the system. 

The idea here is to combine the effect of the semantic attractive / repulsive forces mentioned in the first paragraph with the effect of the altered semantic energy field to guide the semantic ensembles entering the system toward their true semantic position. The important thing to recognize in order to make this mechanism work is that the semantic attractive and repulsive forces cause deviations in the ensemble trajectory on a smaller scale than the scale at which the altered semantic energy field acts over the ensemble trajectory. That is, the semantic attractive and repulsive forces will start affecting the trajectory of a semantic ensemble travelling toward its true semantic position only if it is close enough to the particles or structures which exert the aforementioned forces. That is, the semantic forces are local in nature while the alterations in the semantic energy field have global effect since semantic energy can be carried by the ensemble in semantic space.

Inference in semantic space is done by recognizing patterns in the created structures and their trajectories. Matching the recognized patterns will lead to creating new structures. The inherent semantic properties of the newly created (inferred) structures will determine the motion and trajectories of the latter which in turn will influence the already existing semantic structures. Hence semantic inference will alter the semantic distances and composition of the structures in proximity of the newly inferred structures. Thus, semantic Inference will alter the semantic meaning assigned to the points in the region of interest. 
For the purpose of understanding and modeling semantic Inference it is defined a new construct Semantic Template. 

Each semantic template is a composite structure which exists in a different than Semantic Space metric space which will be denoted as Template Space. Each Semantic Template is composed of two types of template structures – Pattern Matching Structure and Inference Structure.  The Pattern Matching Structure is bound to specific region of Semantic Space which it tracks for certain patterns. The patterns of interest are the presence of certain semantic signatures with certain trajectories. As soon as it detects a pattern which it is tuned to recognize the Pattern Matching Structure activates the Inference Structure of the same template. In result, the Inference Structure produces an Inferred Semantic Structure in specific place and time in Semantic Space. In effect the Inference Structure is also bound to a region in Semantic Space in which it creates the newly inferred structure. Thus, we say that the Semantic Template has been triggered and has produced an inference. 


## What's Next?

There are three topics in Semantic Structures which need to be completed as I feel those are of importance to the whole idea of semantic simulation by using a dynamical system. Those topics are:

1) Modeling of the aggregation of Semantic Structures via attractive / repulsive forces acting on the former and via their interaction with the semantic energy field:
The idea is to combine the effect of the semantic attractive / repulsive forces with the effect of the altered semantic energy field to guide the semantic ensembles entering the system toward their true semantic position. The important thing to recognize in order to make this mechanism work is that the semantic attractive and repulsive forces cause deviations in the ensemble trajectory on a smaller scale than the scale at which the altered semantic energy field acts over the ensemble trajectory. That is, the semantic attractive and repulsive forces will start affecting the trajectory of a semantic ensemble travelling toward its true semantic position only if it is close enough to the particles or structures which exert the aforementioned forces. That is, the semantic forces are local in nature while the alterations in the semantic energy field have global effect since semantic energy can be carried by the ensemble in semantic space. 
Need more work on the energy field based mechanism of guiding semantic structures toward their true semantic in-situ position.  
Need more work on the model of attraction / repulsion of semantic structures via semantic associations / disassociations. Need to clarify how this mechanism will work together with the energy field based mechanism to synthesize the correct semantic structure after some evolution and how the newly formed semantic structure will eventually reach its true semantic in-situ position.

2) Completing the modeling of Semantic Inference via Semantic Templates:
We need to understand the meaning of the metric distance in Template Space – what does it mean for two Template Structures to be close to each other in Template Space? Does it mean that regions in Semantic Space they are bound to will be close? Or it means that the kind of patterns they are going to recognize will be somewhat similar? How does the Inference Structures factor in the definition of a distance between two Semantic Templates? So the completion of the Semantic Template concept will depend on finding meaningful answers to these questions.

3) Elaborate on the mechanism of Reinforcement Learning through alteration of the semantic energy field to find the true semantic in-situ positions of semantic structures.

There is a more advanced topic which I would like to gain better understanding and have clearer idea in my mind about. This is topic of _Hierarchical Semantic Template Spaces_. 
